# Global NCP Time Series Update

  Meeting started: 9/26/2025, 10:01:48 AM
  Duration: 56 minutes
  Participants: Becky, Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar, Steve Polasky

  [View original transcript](https://app.tactiq.io/api/2/u/m/r/Cj9n4eEEqOTg9cRaROLX?o=txt)

    

  ## Notes

  For Jeronimo to do:
- put take aways at the top (simplified), after questions
- add coastal risk to the table, and collapse all the nitrogens and all the sediments into the same row of the table
- summarize by world regions, income group, biome - for individual services and the combos
- rescale maps so top bins are enough pixels to be visible (maybe just equal size bins?)
- prepare the QGIS so you have all the services hotspots absolute and relative change

  
    ## Highlights

    > 08:14 Becky: So, Steve can make the meeting next week, but suggested it would still be useful.
> 15:08 Steve Polasky: Yeah, I mean, are there places, important places, of gain?
> 16:02 Becky: It hopefully won't be actually that hard. I don't know if you think you can do it by next week, but…
> 16:20 Steve Polasky: Right. The losses are the thing which is gonna be, you know, that's gonna be… frankly, the headline of this paper, so focusing on that is important.
> 23:04 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Really, where is… it is more… more strong the effect or the change. Um, same export, Sayment retention ratio. Pollination, and of course, we already see that South America is quite an issue.
> 26:32 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: That just shows visually. The service, like, the… How similar they are. So, the brighter colors means a higher D, so there is more separation between them. So the KS statistic is larger, so, for example, for this, uh, combination nature axis. Population, the difference is positive. While in others here in risk reduction ratio and, uh…
> 31:51 Becky: I… so, yeah, we did kind of lose the regional aspect, just the sort of the reporting component of, like, where are the most of these. And especially your map of the multiple. Hotspots, like where those hotspots overlap. Summarizing that in some way seems really important to me. Like, even if you don't do the KS test on that.
> 33:52 Becky: But Geronimo 4 next week, I think it's really a low lift for you to do some kind of summary.
> 33:58 Becky: On the regional, like. On… basically on your slide, uh… I'm looking for the slide, sorry, on your slide 27 and 28. The count of the hotspots. Some kind of summary for that. Otherwise, that map just falls flat, like, you don't pick it up again.
> 36:15 Becky: Yeah, I think having a takeaway that is a spatial… a spatial takeaway seems really important to me for this.
> 36:51 Steve Polasky: So, one thing… one thing on your list of, you know, not for necessarily for next week.
> 41:20 Becky: Okay. I think I would just do even-sized bins, honestly. Like, I think that's more important, that it's… that you actually can see everything.
> 45:01 Becky: I know! Uh… Especially because, like, I think Steve's earlier point seems really important.
> 47:30 Becky: Yeah, okay. That's great. I think that's the kind of thing, probably don't… put it in your slide of things to explore, or things to try next, but don't worry about doing it for next week.
> 47:42 Becky: But I think that… for next week, I have a few actions for you, and…
> 47:48 Becky: The two most important, I think, are summarized by world regions, income group, and biome.

  ## Transcript
08:14 Becky: So, Steve can make the meeting next week, but suggested it would still be useful.
08:21 Becky: For us to, um… to have this preview.
08:24 Steve Polasky: Yeah, just to have a run-through, yeah.
08:25 Becky: Yeah, so why don't you just start from the top, Peronomo, and sort of go through it like you want to go through it with the group? And, um… And Steve, I think you should just feel free to interrupt, as opposed to, like, letting him get all the way through it, because I think sometimes. We might have certain… aspects that we don't… we just don't need to spend time on, so we can just say, let's… let's skip this part, or something like that.
08:51 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Okay, um, what are you seeing?
08:52 Becky: Do you want to start… actually, do you want to start with your takeaways? Um, I don't know if you want to do this, you might want to do this in the actual talk, like, start with the takeaways, go through the whole thing, and then come back to the takeaways.
09:03 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Okay, I put the takeaways on the last slide, but I…
09:06 Becky: That's fine. No, no, no, I'm just saying, like, maybe start with that one and then go back to the top.
09:12 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Okay, yeah, um, I'm trying to join… let's see how this goes… And I'm hearing…
09:16 Becky: I can see your screen sharing. Right now.
09:21 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Like, hmm, yeah, yeah.
09:21 Becky: Yeah, we can see your screen, so just go back to the slide where you just were.
09:26 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: And now you can see the slide. Okay, great. So, um, we did all this analysis with the hotspots and non-hotspots for, uh.
09:26 Steve Polasky: Yeah. Yes?
09:28 Becky: Yep.
09:38 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Actually 8 different variables, and run as…
09:41 Becky: Do you want to… do you want to just go into, uh, presentation mode so we can see the full… like, it's pretty tiny right now.
09:46 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, yeah. Mmm… Yeah, um…
09:50 Becky: Um, and just don't… don't go through what you did, because you'll do that next, right now. Let's just look at your takeaways.
09:55 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Okay. Okay, where is the…
09:55 Becky: Let's just see what you… what you're saying. With what you found.
10:01 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Okay.
10:01 Becky: And we'll… and we'll go… we'll go through… we'll step through what you did right after this, but… So, hotspots differ from the background, meaning the not hotspots, right?
10:11 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah.
10:13 Becky: Um, and so… Uh, there's… okay, so they're different, so that's your first takeaway. Like, they are different distributions.
10:17 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, they're different. Yeah, there are significantly different. Not all of them, some more than others. But in general, the hotspots are concentrated in, like, in specific locations, and um… And… but it also depends a lot on the… on the nature of the service, so… Reduction, retention, access, these, these tend to be in… In places with higher populations and higher GDP, but in others, for example, for pollination. It's the contrary. Hotspots are almost in less urban or lower density contexts, which is kind of, um… expected, but also that the effect of the size of these effects sizes varies by service. Uh, some services have a very large separations, or they're not so much.
11:08 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: But it can help us to have a better understanding of what is happening. But it's not just about, like, where there are more people, or it's more densely populated, or it's more activities.
11:18 Becky: Yeah.
11:21 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: There are more hotspots, and actually, what is about Genie and field size. They behave in their own way that I don't see any clear relationship between different genie levels and. The concentration of hot spots. Which is interesting, but it is more about the service and.
11:35 Becky: Mmm…
11:41 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: For example, in the case of, uh… access, they, of course, they tend to be also located in certain areas of the world that. Um, so, for example, Access, there are a lot of gains in Europe, in the US, but most of the losses are in South America. And Sub-Saharan Africa, that's where we have the largest losses in nature axis. It seems there is, um, um… But, uh, so far, I also… I… these hotspots here are in term… in relative terms.
12:15 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Not in absolute terms, I got the…
12:15 Becky: Okay, okay, that's… let's pause there, because you'll get into that when we go through the whole thing. Um, I do think it would be really helpful. It's been a long time since people have… thought about this, so I think it would be actually really helpful to just start with, like. Hey, I want to tell you what we found after all this work. Um, maybe, maybe what we need first is the, like, what were our questions?
12:41 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm.
12:41 Becky: Slide, and then what did we find? And then go into your methods. And for this part, I don't think you need to go into as much detail, because you can go into more detail in the actual presentation.
12:43 Steve Polasky: Yeah. Yeah.
12:50 Becky: The one thing you do need to do here, and then I'll shut up, because what we really want to do is hear from Steve. But you need to define hotspots. Remind them… remind them that we're talking about the places that decline the most.
12:56 Steve Polasky: Yes.
12:56 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yes.
13:02 Becky: From 2000 to 2020. Or 1992 to 2020, is that what we did? Anyway, the places that declined the most.
13:08 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yes. Or…
13:10 Becky: In ecosystem services, okay? So just, like, have that be in your first point. Hot spots of ecosystem service decline. Are different.
13:19 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Or increase damage. For export.
13:22 Becky: Uh, yeah, okay. But I mean… I think you can be a little bit simplistic in… in just… in this slide.
13:29 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Okay, yeah, but it's… It's…
13:29 Becky: And let me turn that over to Steve.
13:33 Steve Polasky: No, that… that's really helpful, because I was thinking of hotspots as just… Like, oh, these are places with lots of…
13:41 Becky: Right, yeah.
13:42 Steve Polasky: Service, and you're using hotspots in a different way, which is the decline.
13:47 Becky: Yeah, like, worry spots.
13:47 Steve Polasky: Which is good, because I was gonna ask you, like, I thought this paper was all about decline or change.
13:53 Becky: Yes, exactly, exactly.
13:54 Steve Polasky: So, yeah, so that's very helpful to know that.
13:59 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, so I… I mean, I extracted all the data, and I was able to build, like, a pipeline that gets both. Here, in this case, I was just interested in declines or increased damages, but we could. Very easily just changing a parameter, we want to see both tails, or we want to see improvements, or… reduce damage. That is totally possible. Right now, I just focus on the… focused on the losses or the damages. But the contrary can be very easily be done.
14:28 Steve Polasky: No, no, it's… I… keep the focus on the loss. Uh, and also, loss meaning, you know.
14:32 Becky: Yeah.
14:39 Steve Polasky: Potentially increased damages. In other words, it's a negative. It's a negative direction in terms of… You know, the benefits, right?
14:51 Becky: Yeah.
14:52 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, but yeah, that's it. Yeah, so we focus this time in the damages, losses. Eventually, we could do more analysis, but here, we are focusing on who is being affected by this ecosystem services losses. And where are they?
15:08 Steve Polasky: Yeah, I mean, are there places, important places, of gain?
15:15 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Uh, I have not produced the maps, so I don't actually know. But, um… I could get it, but I didn't get it right now.
15:24 Steve Polasky: Okay. I mean, it would be… Yeah. Um, for example, when we did our work in China.
15:26 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: I mean, I mean, I did not produce the maps.
15:36 Steve Polasky: Between 20… or 2000 and 2015. At least according to Chinese data, there were a lot of areas of gain in ecosystem services.
15:45 Becky: Mmm… Yeah.
15:48 Steve Polasky: And, you know, it makes sense because they put all of their stuff into, you know, sloping lane conversion program, and reforestation, and blah blah blah, but yeah.
15:48 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Hmm.
15:55 Becky: Totally. No, that's a really good point, Steve. I think now that you have the pipeline, Geronimo.
16:01 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm. Ugh.
16:02 Becky: It hopefully won't be actually that hard. I don't know if you think you can do it by next week, but…
16:08 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: I, yes, I, I just, I…
16:09 Becky: You can just, if nothing else, have a placeholder slide for, this is something… we want to now do, now that we have the pipeline worked out. If you don't think you can get it done in time, don't stress.
16:20 Steve Polasky: Right. The losses are the thing which is gonna be, you know, that's gonna be… frankly, the headline of this paper, so focusing on that is important.
16:21 Becky: Um… Yeah. And to be honest, it was surprising to me. Um, because I didn't expect the losses to be happening in… Higher GDP context. But it's like, I have to keep reminding myself that it's not, like, the logic is not… If it's higher GDP, it's a hotspot. It's rather… if it's a hotspot. It's more likely to be higher GDP, and those are not the same things. So it's not… It's not to say that all hy… you know. High GDP places are more likely to be hotspots. That's not true.
17:00 Steve Polasky: Well, that wouldn't be true. I mean, isn't this… again, you're defining hotspots as loss or change.
17:06 Becky: Yeah. Yeah.
17:08 Steve Polasky: Right? So the places that are experiencing the most rapid habitat change. Are not in high-income countries, they're in low-income tropical countries, so… Yeah.
17:16 Becky: Right, exactly. But of those places that are experiencing a lot of change, the ones that seem to be… the, like… Yeah, that's a… so the places that have the most…
17:17 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm. And…
17:28 Becky: I think I have to keep reminding myself that the places that have the most declines. Are disproportionate, like, they are more high GDP. Than average, but that doesn't… there's still a lot of high GDP places that don't have declines, that aren't hotspots. So it's not like GDP is a predictor of hotspots, it's more… within hotspots, that's one of the things that, um…
17:53 Steve Polasky: Huh, okay. That's interesting.
17:55 Becky: I mean, it's just… it's surprising. It's surprising. Um…
17:55 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah. And…
18:01 Becky: So maybe we should go into it, actually, now.
18:03 Steve Polasky: Let's go into it. Yeah, we should stop talking and let Geronimo… Do his thing.
18:04 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah. Yeah, and it's… So, uh… So this… so, just where we are, what are the results, and what we need going forward. So, this is basically the methods.
18:24 Steve Polasky: Great.
18:26 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: What data we used, how we summarize it. Uh, we calculated by temporal change between the two dates for absolute… for ecosystem services, in absolute and relative terms. Then extracted the hotspots. In this case. We use a quantile, or a threshold of the 5%. Top-bottom values, so for loss or damage. And then this produces. Two things is a vector output that identifies all the grid cells that are 10 kilometer grid cells. That are output labeled for each one of the services, and then we can use that to produce maps, or for further analysis. Or to extract, um, scatter plots and other visual, um, outputs. And what we did is we ran a set of. Two samples called Mogul of Smirnoff Tests to compare between the two samples.
19:23 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: To see if there were significantly different or not. And produce a set of, um… Graphic outputs to see that better. That was it. That's the whole… I mean… Months of work, and that's it. But anyway. So, this is the input data that we…
19:38 Becky: Yeah.
19:43 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: It says right here, those are the modeled ecosystem service layers produced by. Not me. Um… Most of them are water-based, pollution, and uh… Soil retention, also something about pollination and coastal protection. Okay, and coastal protection is not here, because coastal protection is originally not a raster. A totally different process, but we included that in the analysis.
20:11 Becky: Yeah, give it… give it a row, though, just so people know.
20:11 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: And we… Yeah, I, I…
20:15 Becky: Um, and what I might do also is just, like, group nitrogen export retention and retention ratio into one. Um… bucket, one box. You can have them on separate lines, but just so people see it as, like. Then there's nitrogen stuff, and do the same for sediment. Usle and sediment ratio, just to show, like, okay, you experimented a little bit with which outputs from those models, but you never.
20:31 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm. Yeah.
20:41 Becky: You never included them all together. It was sort of like an either-or, like, which things should you look at? In these combinations. Does that make sense?
20:49 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm. So, and those are, like, the layers of socioeconomic data representing beneficiaries or local. Economic conditions, inequality, and, like. And how can… how… and we try to, once we extracted the hotspots. How this relates with each one of these variables. Like, those are all for 2020, except for Meravi, but that doesn't change that much over time, so… I think it's still acceptable. Then we just see here, like, the two… the two moments, I… I mean, we see the difference, but this is very hard to see what is actually happening.
21:20 Steve Polasky: Yeah.
21:30 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: So, in, like, in broad terms. So, this is for pollination and nature access. And then, those are also coastal protection. I didn't map them because the… We can really see them, because it is a very thin… Um, stripe on the coast, so I'm just mentioning them, but the maps, like, the global level. You don't see much. So. Those are the layers of socioeconomic data. Um, in terms of GDP. Human Development Index, GINI, Farm Size. And there are the sources. And then, what we did is, okay, we set a threshold of 5%.
22:13 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: This can be… also be… Adjusted if necessary, and… Only one tail, but again, we can do both tails if necessary. And of course. We need to have the hotspots and separate them from the non-hotspots to be able to compare them. So, this is how it looks. For each one of the… of the services assessed. So, they just, like, the colors just indicate. For which, if a cell is a hotspot or not, and the intensity of the color means the value. This is percentage of change. So most of the changes are between 49 and… yeah, and this is because the data is very skewed. But this is how it looks like for… nitrogen export, nitrogen retention ratio, so we not only see the hot spots, but.
23:04 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Really, where is… it is more… more strong the effect or the change. Um, same export, Sayment retention ratio. Pollination, and of course, we already see that South America is quite an issue.
23:21 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Nature Access, and OK. This is just the visual form. This is, uh… vector file that it's fully accessible, I will share that in a moment. And then we group them, okay. We also want to see not just them separated, but maybe combine them. And see how they look together. So I set two levels of aggregation. One was, like, these services, the second one was these ones, and this is how it looks like.
23:51 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: This is the first, um, combination of services, and again, the… the pattern is kind of similar in the… In the regions where this is happening. And this is, like, the two different sets. One was about more export, and same in export, so more about. Focusing on damage, and here, because it's a ratios, is about. The relationship between the service and the damage, which is why we work with the ratios. So, once we got them, so we want to compare how they behave between.
24:33 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Them both, so what is the… the amount of change between them. If they cluster in a specific region, if they look… Different in hotspot. If they are, like, all compressed or spread out, and then… They look like this. So, we have one of these charts for each one of the services. And each one of the variables. So this purple thing. Are the non-hotspots, and these are the… are the hotspots, so where they are in relationship with the whole data set.
25:05 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: I exaggerated the visualization to make it more visible. But, of course, we can adjust this, but this is how it looks, and we… Because I want to see where the data is actually clustered, and HDI always behaves in a very interesting way. And we have all the combinations, of course, what it means, for example, field sizes. Either very small, uh, plots or very large. And not a lot in the middle, but that's also how the data is distributed. And so, for each one of these things. It requires its own interpretation, and then I run a set of. Ks test to sh… to test whether the distribution is… differs between the two… the two sets. And, um, so explaining these statistics, seeing how significant it is.
25:58 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: And there are, like, some adjustments that I need to do, because the… the population is quite large, and also because we wanted to see… to focus on one side, not on both. This is how, just, like, how the dataset, like, once analyzed looks. So, each service variable combinations. Produces all this line of, uh… All this set of metrics that… we used to analyze and to identify the differences, and here is a heat map.
26:32 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: That just shows visually. The service, like, the… How similar they are. So, the brighter colors means a higher D, so there is more separation between them. So the KS statistic is larger, so, for example, for this, uh, combination nature axis. Population, the difference is positive. While in others here in risk reduction ratio and, uh…
27:04 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Fields, of course, it's… It's not very significant, because there are not many… Crops or fields on the coast, but. We have all these combinations, all these different cases, and we can go one by one. So, this is just the same thing, but making it maybe easier to compare for each one of the data sets. And then we produce, um… empirical, cumulative distribution function. To see how they look, like, how they compare. And again. It's the same thing. So the blue line are the non-hotspots. The red line are the hot spots, and this is the. The share of the total distribution that is in each one of these values. Here is for GDP. And what it seems to… show, like, it depends on the size… the site, and.
27:56 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: How far away these two lines are, where they meet, if… whether they. Cross that is telling us, okay, how does this data actually behave? So, this is for GDP. So, there are, um… if we put ourselves here, that would be, like, in… I don't know, 30% of the… of the data are around 10 in GP. This is the sum. Actually, this is by… by pixel, I should have brought the units, but anyway, and this is transformed by a… And we have the same… case for all cases. So, in HDI, it's interesting, only for pollination, because it's mostly rural. But in other cases, I'm not sure if there is that much of a difference. Especially, for example, here, same and retention ratio is… basically the same.
28:54 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Those are very similar, our two datasets of population. I put them together because they, with some minor differences, they… Are very consistent between them. The overlay that's for Genie. Again, pollination is always… stands out. And also a bit salient export. And, um… ACD, this is… built areas… Which is something that is interesting, it's, like, kind of the contrary. This is kind of weird, because we have, like, this… Like, the special units of… included in the Maria Bay dataset didn't allow more. More spatial resolution, but this is how it looks like, and… The challenge here is to say, okay.
29:42 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: What does it mean, and what does this imply in policy, or in… Assessing what is happening here? Where should we prioritize? What is, um… and, of course, there is not… this is not a discussion about causality. But about how these different variables relate to each other. So, on, like, yeah, the last… Uh, slide that I don't know why is hidden. Was this one. Let's unhide it, but yeah, this is basically. What I did, we have all the data in a 10 kilometer grid cell for the whole world and the pipeline, so… We can update it and include new layers as they become available. And I will be happy to share this with the rest of, like. Of the team at NATCAP teams, or NatCap, because I really want.
30:37 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: People to contribute and maybe take advantage of what is here. Also, all the data. When I calculated the change has been labeled with the, um… Country data set from Justin. So we can run the same kind of analysis for the groupings in the original dataset. Individual countries, continent, income level, um… World Bank Region, whatever is there. Like, if we have the… If we want to say, for example, okay, hotspots, but just for South America, or for Brazil, or for… Or for a less developed countries, that can be also done to… you want to compare between different development levels.
31:24 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: There are, because each one of the… of the, um… of the grid cells is labeled to be able to… Show the specific country, and then join with the… brought their Justin's dataset to run the analysis at the regional level, if we need. And that's how the whole thing works.
31:51 Becky: I… so, yeah, we did kind of lose the regional aspect, just the sort of the reporting component of, like, where are the most of these. And especially your map of the multiple. Hotspots, like where those hotspots overlap. Summarizing that in some way seems really important to me. Like, even if you don't do the KS test on that.
32:06 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm.
32:11 Becky: At least saying, you know, how, like. What percent of total area in different regions, or something like that, have multiple hotspots, or… I don't know. Like, just so you have a little bit of comparison of, like, where are those things… where are those places?
32:27 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, yeah, that… Yeah, well, yeah, we could do that. What I'm saying is that in the. In the dataset before extracting the hotspots, because that can change. For different groupings, there is a column. That IDs each one of the individual cells. To a country, to the country in the same data set that Justin works with. That includes, um… I think, uh, income group, uh…
33:03 Becky: Oh, yeah, that's great.
33:04 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: World Bank, all these sub-regions that are there can be… easily included here if we want to do sub-regional or. By, I don't know, income level, or OECD, non-OECD countries, whatever. Everything is ready to be done, because. The attribute is there, so we can filter out and compare between. Different, uh, regions or cases, or… Any categorization that exists.
33:30 Becky: Yeah.
33:33 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: All these comparisons can be done.
33:35 Becky: So, so maybe what would be helpful is a slide. At the end, after the takeaways of additional… Like, things that you've already thought of, additional angles. One of them is looking at the bright spots.
33:46 Steve Polasky: Right.
33:47 Becky: Um, you know, the, like, the improving hotspots. One of them could be sub-regional analyses.
33:48 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
33:52 Becky: But Geronimo 4 next week, I think it's really a low lift for you to do some kind of summary.
33:58 Becky: On the regional, like. On… basically on your slide, uh… I'm looking for the slide, sorry, on your slide 27 and 28. The count of the hotspots. Some kind of summary for that. Otherwise, that map just falls flat, like, you don't pick it up again.
34:12 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm.
34:18 Becky: And you should have something about regions in your takeaways. Right now, there's nothing that shows that this is a spatial exercise, you know? Like, there's nothing in your key takeaways that…
34:18 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm.
34:30 Becky: Actually show how cool this is geographically, like, from a geographic perspective. Um, so I guess, you know, just looking at this, I'm like, oh… I see brighter greens in South America. And I guess some in Africa. And a little in China, I don't know. Um, but I don't really know… I think it's hard to resolve. Whether that's the 2 or the 3. Um… and it would be… it'd be great to just, like, get that, like, stats, bar graphs, basically, of, um, by region, by…
35:07 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mmm… Yeah.
35:07 Becky: Income group. Um…
35:09 Steve Polasky: Yeah, and you can do, like, you know, your four fives, like, okay, so how are they distributed? And then the, you know, 1 through 3, or 1 and 2, I… you can… do the break off, but it would be…
35:19 Becky: Yeah.
35:23 Steve Polasky: Good to know, yes, like, we're the ones that are just lighting up for every service where those are.
35:32 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mmm, yeah. Yeah, and they are, like… they're here, like, this place is…
35:36 Steve Polasky: Mm-hmm. Yeah.
35:39 Becky: And I think… I think you need to do it… fairly, because these world regions or income groups are really different areas, so I think you do need to do some sort of, like. Area weighted, or something, but, you know, so don't just count up the area of those hot spots, but do some sort of percent or something, but… But yeah, I really think a comparison across regions, across.
35:52 Steve Polasky: Yeah. Right.
35:59 Becky: Income groups, and what was the other one? Biomes, I guess? You could also do biomes.
36:01 Steve Polasky: Mm-hmm.
36:01 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm. That… yeah, it's just another rejoin, and yeah, it could be done by…
36:09 Becky: Okay.
36:11 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: By any special unit, it can be… It can be joined… Yeah, it can be joined without much…
36:15 Becky: Yeah, I think having a takeaway that is a spatial… a spatial takeaway seems really important to me for this.
36:21 Steve Polasky: Yes. And you might think about doing that spatial takeaway not only for the combination, but for each service, like, to pollination losses show up in certain kinds of places? Do sediment losses show up in other kinds of places? Yeah.
36:21 Becky: For this work.
36:22 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm. Mmm! Mmm. Mm-hmm. Yeah, yeah, that's… that's… That's totally true, yeah.
36:36 Becky: Yeah. Yeah. That's great.
36:43 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, that's…
36:46 Becky: Okay, I'm making a note of that. Um… Cool. So…
36:51 Steve Polasky: So, one thing… one thing on your list of, you know, not for necessarily for next week.
36:59 Steve Polasky: Um, besides thinking about improvement, I mean, I would be interested in thinking about not just taking a 5% cutoff and saying, oh, those are our hotspots. But thinking about some kind of either absolute or relative change, like, did you come over a certain… amount of change. Um, we're showing just how that varies across the landscape, like places that basically have no change versus places that have a 10% loss versus 20% loss, and so forth, and just… sort of seeing that, as opposed to just a…
37:18 Becky: Hmm… Yeah. Totally.
37:32 Steve Polasky: Like, a 5% cutoff of the top 5%, we lose a lot of the richness of information that you have. Yeah.
37:41 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm.
37:43 Becky: Yeah, do you actually have… can you report. What the 5% cutoff is in terms of percent of change for each of these. I feel like this is for Nature Access, so you're saying. All of these… okay, actually, you have it right here. So even the dark blue are… Our hotspots. So, it's everything above 48… percent, right?
38:05 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yes. Is… yes, exactly.
38:11 Becky: Okay, so that, yeah, like Steve says, like, that's pretty high.
38:16 Steve Polasky: Yeah.
38:16 Becky: But for other services, I think it's much lower, like… like, I think you had 1% change was in the top 5%.
38:24 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, there are… yeah, for example, here is more moderate.
38:24 Becky: Um, for 1910 or something like that. Yeah, sediment is 20%, okay.
38:31 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: This is absolutely crazy, but yeah. There are really very few points. I could… Actually, this is an outlier, and in my thing, here in these charts, I… just stream the data between 1% and 99%, because if not, like, the whole distribution… it was too skewed, and… Nothing would be visible. That's why I trimmed the, like, the… the outliers.
38:50 Becky: Yeah. Sure, yeah. Um…
38:50 Steve Polasky: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
38:57 Becky: I think maybe in those legends, though, for the maps. I would do an equal bins, right? Like, what's the point of having just a few. Pixels that you can't even see. Like, why do that? There's no…
39:09 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mmm…
39:12 Becky: There's no information there. If you go back to that map, like, if there's… if there's nothing your eye can pick up that's yellow or red or whatever the top one was.
39:22 Steve Polasky: Mm-hmm.
39:22 Becky: Then should broaden that bin, because… the point of it is for people to see where those places are, where the highest… The hottest of the hot spots are, right? So I'm gonna… I'm gonna add that to your list of, like, rescale maps, so top bins are…
39:33 Steve Polasky: Yeah.
39:33 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm.
39:41 Becky: Enough pixels to be visible.
39:43 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, yeah, so it's… it's… I have, because… Each one of the… of the services. Has a totally different distribution, so I have struggled a lot finding. Visualization, like, settings that work in all cases. It has… Yeah, but… yeah.
40:01 Becky: You can… you can just do it by quantiles. Let's just do it, do it, let ARC or Q set the quantiles. Like, it can set them separately for each service.
40:02 Steve Polasky: Does that… yeah. Yeah.
40:11 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, I did, I did, but still, it's like…
40:16 Becky: Equal? Like, really? Having equal bins didn't work?
40:19 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Um… I mean, yeah, but then in some cases, like, there are so few points that you can… Like, especially in the extremely high levels. Like, here, it…
40:30 Steve Polasky: But if you're doing quantiles, you should not have extremely few points, right? That's the whole point of doing the quantiles.
40:35 Becky: Yeah, they should be the same number. You should have 4 equal-sized bins here, right?
40:39 Steve Polasky: Right, right.
40:43 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, I used… Toria?
40:43 Becky: Is that how it is working? That's not how it's working, when you choose even… Here, let me… are you using Q or ARC? I'm just, like, looking to see what the… Okay, great. Great, great, great.
40:54 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: I haven't used Arc in years, to be honest.
40:59 Becky: So, let me just… I just want to bring Q up to see, because I'm surprised that that doesn't… uh, give you an option. To just say… Like, what are you using for your…
41:09 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah.
41:14 Becky: For your breaks? Are you using pretty brakes?
41:19 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: I am using pretty brakes, yes.
41:20 Becky: Okay. I think I would just do even-sized bins, honestly. Like, I think that's more important, that it's… that you actually can see everything.
41:32 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, I just, um… Equal count, and that's all.
41:32 Becky: Um… Mm-hmm. Totally.
41:35 Steve Polasky: Mm-hmm.
41:37 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Let's see how it… how it turns. Yeah, the problem is this, then, yeah. It looks kind of… ugly, but that's not… Yeah, it was more about, um, visuals than anything else. But… yeah. Yeah.
41:47 Becky: Wait, hang on. Why does it look ugly?
41:58 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Meh, I don't know, I just didn't… find them, so… So, uh…
42:02 Becky: But this is even, right? I can see everything. I can see blue versus green versus red. Like, I see where those things are.
42:05 Steve Polasky: Right.
42:12 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Okay, yeah. I mean, because the thing was this…
42:14 Becky: I mean, I guess function over form would be my vote. It is weird, though, that it's like, these are even-sized bins, and it's 00, and zero. Hmm…
42:20 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, that's true.
42:28 Steve Polasky: Well, that's… I mean, what is your scale here, right? I mean, it's…
42:28 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yep.
42:32 Becky: Problematic. Oh yeah, like, it's really, really, really small, like.000008 or something.
42:40 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, I shouldn't see how many…
42:40 Becky: Wow. Oh my gosh, this seems wrong.
42:45 Steve Polasky: Wait a minute, what is going on? This seems really weird. This is the top 5%?
42:46 Becky: That seems very strange.
42:53 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yes, for this, uh… Which is one, uh, saving retention ratio.
42:53 Steve Polasky: Of change?
42:59 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Percentage of change, just the hotspots of that specific service.
43:03 Steve Polasky: Yeah, so…
43:03 Becky: We might want to drop those… the retention ratios, if they're like this, because that seems really screwed to me. That doesn't make any sense. Um… Okay.
43:17 Steve Polasky: Yeah, and this is… this is… Exactly. I mean, this is… this is the thing where I usually… I want to, like.
43:17 Becky: Like, I'd really love to know what the value is of the different zeros. Anyway.
43:26 Steve Polasky: Before I settle on final presentation, obviously, it's like, figure out what's going on here. Like, I would not call something that has a true zero, or zero out to.
43:36 Becky: A hotspot. Yeah.
43:37 Steve Polasky: I wouldn't call it a hotspot, because it's not changing.
43:40 Becky: That's where, like, the top 5% is not helping us. How are you calculating the retention percent changes, Karamo? Are you just taking… because they're already proportional?
43:44 Steve Polasky: Right.
43:50 Becky: Those values are already 0 to 1. So are you just taking an absolute difference between those, or are you taking a percentage difference between those 0 to 1 differences?
44:00 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: I calculated both, but in this case, it's the relative difference between them.
44:04 Becky: Okay. I think that might not work for the proportional ones. I feel like they're already a proportion.
44:05 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: But, yeah, I…
44:05 Steve Polasky: Yeah, so…
44:12 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, that's true. Just, uh…
44:12 Becky: I don't know.
44:17 Steve Polasky: Well, yeah, and what are they a proportion of?
44:18 Becky: It's the… it's the load minus the export over the load, so it's, like, how much of the total… so rather than just showing change and export, it's a way of saying, like, what's the change in the proportion of what got retained?
44:23 Steve Polasky: Yeah. Oh, okay.
44:31 Becky: But I think when you're talking about change in a proportion.
44:35 Steve Polasky: Yeah. Yeah. Yep.
44:35 Becky: It gets very confusing to do that as a percentage.
44:38 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Um, yeah, yeah, this…
44:41 Becky: Um, but we could also just leave that out. Of this particular presentation, Geronimo, while we troubleshoot it. I don't know. This just seems really worrying to me, like, seeing 3 bins of zeros is, like…
44:57 Steve Polasky: Yeah, and it may be 4 is… almost four bins of zero, we don't really know.
44:58 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Hmm.
45:01 Becky: I know! Uh… Especially because, like, I think Steve's earlier point seems really important.
45:04 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mmm…
45:10 Becky: Of trying to un… think about what might be meaningful. Change. Um… That it's, you know, just because it's in the top 5%. Basically, if something has not changed anywhere. Talking about hotspots for that variable is meaningless. Um, and so then maybe it's like, okay, we really just want to actually look at the very few places, maybe it's just 1% of places, maybe it's just 0.1% of places, but they did actually change. They changed.
45:25 Steve Polasky: Doesn't make sense. Right.
45:28 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm.
45:40 Becky: You know, 10% or more. Um… And that's where I, like… Yeah. Can you show us the absolute of the… and retention?
45:51 Steve Polasky: Yeah, that would be interesting.
45:53 Becky: Is that Ben Richardson or N-Retention proportion? Which one is that?
45:53 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Of the…
45:56 Becky: That's proportion, right?
45:59 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Okay, this is the… I will have to… wait, one second…
46:07 Becky: Oh, no, it's okay. If you don't have it loaded, that's okay.
46:10 Steve Polasky: Yeah, you can…
46:14 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Where is the masked thing? Yeah, it's here, uh, somewhere… I would have… I wasn't…
46:18 Becky: Oh, I saw it, and retention absolute change, it was up. Whoops, oh well.
46:21 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, but it will include all of them, and I only need. The… Ah, yeah, I know what happened, buddy. Anyway, I couldn't find…
46:32 Becky: Okay, don't worry about it.
46:37 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: That attribute here, when I am, like, on the rush. But yeah, we can do that for the absolute change that are… Are here. There are actually… it's interesting because it's 5% is the… Quantile, not the absolute number of values, but just the. Bottom 5% of the change? No, the… 5%… Lowest, like, 5% sales with the lowest change. But also, the function accepts quantiles, or just absolute numbers of. Of cells. So, we can do it… the 5% lower values, or the 5%.
47:13 Becky: Mm-hmm.
47:20 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Beans with the lowest values. Both things are possible, and I did buy CONTIL, but…
47:23 Becky: Yep.
47:26 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: We can do also by absolute numbers. By percentage.
47:30 Becky: Yeah, okay. That's great. I think that's the kind of thing, probably don't… put it in your slide of things to explore, or things to try next, but don't worry about doing it for next week.
47:39 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm.
47:42 Becky: But I think that… for next week, I have a few actions for you, and…
47:48 Becky: The two most important, I think, are summarized by world regions, income group, and biome.
47:53 Becky: For individual services and for the combos, and rescale the maps, so… the top bins have enough pixels to be visible, and then I think, like.
47:57 Steve Polasky: Yeah.
48:01 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm.
48:02 Becky: And if we want to drop some maps, that's fine. You have plenty of maps. If we're just like, that's a little confusing, this, this, this retention. Well, it's fine, we can come back to it later.
48:11 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Okay. Yeah, but this… when… It's actually very nice. Each one has its own value, it's… And we can explore the host.
48:20 Becky: Yeah, it's cool! I'm really glad we moved to the 10 kilometer grid instead of the watersheds. It makes everything make so much…
48:28 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, and they looked so ugly.
48:31 Steve Polasky: Yeah.
48:34 Becky: Yeah. That was a… that was a long… Yeah, that's so great.
48:35 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: So, this is all the data that is contained in the dataset.
48:41 Becky: Okay, cool. Any… Final thoughts, Steve?
48:47 Steve Polasky: Um, well, just, Geronimo, be prepared, because when, um… you know, I'm holding back to some extent now. Um, and other people will be too, so let's just… they'll, you know, there'll be a lot of… Because we really want to dive in and understand, like, really what. These changes are, and then some about, you know, kind of definitely where they are, and… Um, yeah, so…
49:12 Becky: Yeah.
49:15 Steve Polasky: Anyway, there'll be lots of requests, just to prepare you of, like, hey, can you do it this way? Can you do it that way? Can you do it standing on your head? You know?
49:15 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Hmm. Yeah, and that's… that's why I put so much work, um… developing the pipeline, because.
49:32 Steve Polasky: Yes.
49:32 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: At the beginning, each change, or each idea, even if it made a lot of sense. Meant, like, redoing the whole thing, or adding a new variable, or change… but now it's like… Yeah, throw it to me.
49:44 Steve Polasky: Yes, great.
49:44 Becky: If you can prepare, I'll write this down too, in addition to that rescaling. Just the maps for the presentation. If you can prepare your QGIS so you have every service. Hotspots. By absolute and relative change. I think, just so people can do what… exactly what Steve just asked of, like, is it 10% different, or is it 20% different, or is it one… 1000% different. Like, what are we actually talking about that? I think they might want to…
50:09 Steve Polasky: Mm-hmm.
50:13 Becky: Actually on the fly. See, okay, this is a hotspot in South America that has 3 different overlapping hotspots. Which, like, what are the actual changes for those services in that place? Um, just for you to be able to quickly not have to rescale anything, all of those layers already exist, or basically you're copying the same layer over many times, but with a different scaling.
50:25 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: No, it's…
50:35 Becky: Because you have all that information in there, I just don't think you want to have to color it on the fly, so… Prepare this to JS so people can ask those questions, and you can bring it up on the fly.
50:45 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, sure, like, I mean, this thing, for all the maps of the hotspots, are basically the same layer. Copied and with different visualizations, but yeah, it's just the same layer all the time.
50:58 Becky: No, I know, but I'm just saying, have it pre-scaled. So just keep it copied and have a different version for every service.
51:01 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm.
51:07 Becky: The absolute change and the relative change, so that you can… so people can ask, what is that? And see it quickly.
51:12 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Hmm. So… Yeah, you will have then to adjust the… have the teams ready, so here you just change and say what? What do I want to visualize, and then… That's how it works.
51:26 Becky: Yeah, but if they're already pre-prepared, you won't have to, like… wait for it to load and recolor and everything like that. Right. Okay.
51:33 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm. Yeah, that's it. But yeah, I need to… yeah, it's basically having this thing here, uh, ready with the teams, and… Yeah, I had some prepare that I used to make my maps. But they are not showing all that they need to show, because I wasn't… because the thing is also, you can be… as prefer as you want, they will always, okay, what about this? And it's always the case that I didn't think about.
52:03 Becky: Yeah, of course, of course.
52:07 Steve Polasky: That's fine. And, you know, if it comes up in the call, we can just. You know, we can just say, you just… say, you don't have it, and we can… We'll just add it to the list, yeah.
52:14 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Hmm. Hmm. Okay.
52:14 Becky: Add it, add it to the list. Yeah, totally. No problem. But it is helpful, I think, to use the time well, uh, to have those things kind of, like, set up, ready to go, because we know that people will probably want to see them.
52:18 Steve Polasky: Yeah.
52:28 Becky: Just to interpret. What are we looking at right now?
52:28 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm. That's, uh, same retention ratio.
52:29 Steve Polasky: Yeah, and…
52:37 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: And… And, yeah, this…
52:37 Becky: Ah, okay. That's the one that had… that's the one that had, um…
52:41 Steve Polasky: Lots of zeros. Oh, this one's different.
52:43 Becky: Lots of zeros, but different… oh, no! Is this absolute instead of relative?
52:51 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: No, that's relative also. But before, it was nitrogen.
52:54 Becky: Well, then why is it… Oh, nitrogen. Nitrogen's the problem.
52:55 Steve Polasky: Nitrogen, okay. Hmm.
52:59 Becky: Okay.
53:00 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, I mean, I… like, because there are so many cases and so many variables, sometimes it's hard to keep track of it, but yeah, I'm… I finally got used to it, but yeah. Because we have, like… right now we have… 8 times 7…
53:12 Becky: Okay.
53:20 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: My home… And we need a calculator for that, but it's, like, 40-something different cases.
53:25 Becky: Of what?
53:28 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Of, um, ecosystems, sir… I mean, no, here we have, like, yeah. 8 different services, but when we add the… Um, give the… The beneficiary's data, then we have 8 different sets there. So it makes for you something cases, which is all the case. But here, it's just these maps.
53:51 Becky: The relationships when you're doing the KS, yeah, I get it.
53:51 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: And…
53:53 Becky: Okay. Okay.
53:57 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, but that's how it works. So, I will… so, um, I just wrote here the countries from this… And also by share of the total area, like, uh… The total area of these types of countries, or these continents, and what share of them is a hotspot or not. That can be done quite easily. Mm-hmm.
54:18 Becky: That's great. Great. Okay, awesome. Um… I hope that that is not too much work, Hirano, because I really want to limit your work over the next month so that you have a real break. Um, and I guess after this meeting, you should just really take off.
54:35 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, I'm… I'm flying on the 13th. Yeah, I… I will be… I should start in October 20th.
54:37 Becky: Put it all… put it all in a vault and come back to it October 20th.
54:46 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: I'm… I have very mixed feelings about this, but yeah, I'm… I'm happy also to go home after all these years.
54:54 Becky: Yeah… Well, yeah, the consolation is you get out of this. Shithole country.
55:00 Steve Polasky: Shithole country, exactly.
55:00 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: It's horrible. I mean, if I had… with this $100,000. Fee is, like, forget it.
55:10 Becky: Ugh, it's just absurd.
55:12 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Mm-hmm. But I won't be… afraid of traveling anymore. I haven't left the country in… A while also because of that.
55:21 Becky: Yeah. Well, we look forward to joining you in Columbia for some…
55:22 Steve Polasky: That's amazing, yeah. Yep, yep.
55:23 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Hmm. So… Please, please come, yeah. Yeah.
55:30 Becky: We organize. Um, and also, yeah, I think it's a great idea for you to just be getting your tourist or whichever visa to come back for a meeting.
55:36 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Yeah, because I want to be able… and while I told you, between Philly and San Francisco, it's like 6 hours, somewhere between Bogota, and there is.
55:37 Becky: And it'd be great.
55:46 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: 8. So…
55:46 Becky: Oh, that's great! That's awesome! Uh, and you're even maybe a closer time zone? Or maybe not, because I'm trying to think how far set over it is.
55:56 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: Uh, we are… Bolota is…
55:57 Becky: Anyway.
55:59 Steve Polasky: Here, you're, you're… your Central Time Zone, right?
56:04 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: No, and I… We are in summer, we have… no, in winter, we have the same time, and in summer, we are here is one late.
56:07 Steve Polasky: Oh, that's right, because you don't do daylight, yeah.
56:14 Jeronimo Rodriguez Escobar: One hour later than back home.
56:14 Becky: It is… no, it is
  
  
  Great q. Here’s what that line really means, in plain terms:

Relative extreme:
We call a cell a “hotspot” only because its change sits in the most extreme 5% within that service’s own distribution. It’s a ranking label, not an absolute physical threshold. In a flatter year or a noisier region, a cell can enter/leave the top/bottom 5% even if its raw change isn’t huge in absolute terms.

Not evidence of cause:
Being a hotspot doesn’t tell you why the value is extreme. It doesn’t prove that population, GDP, land use, climate, policy, etc. caused that change. It only flags that “this cell’s change is unusually large (relative to peers).”

Implications:

Hotspots are starting points for explanation, not conclusions.

They’re sensitive to the percentile cutoff (5% vs 10%) and to how the service is distributed (skew, heavy tails).

Comparisons are within-service; a top 5% in Service A isn’t necessarily comparable in magnitude to a top 5% in Service B.

To discuss drivers, you need additional analysis (e.g., regression/controls, stratification, robustness checks).

Quick analogy:
Top 5% finishers in two different marathons are both “elite,” but the finishing times (absolute performance) and the reasons they’re fast (training, course, weather) can differ. Same with hotspots: elite by rank, not a proof of shared cause.



Overall declines of services, broken down by geographies 
Where are the biggest changes happening (intro to hotspots)? 
What social variables correlate with those changes? 
Still to do: 
Geographic differences
absolute values of changes (not just top 5%)
Double check KS test results, esp GDP